Lesson 4 (medium)

 Hey, welcome to the draft Academy. My name is Mike. In this tutorial, I want to talk to you guys about using functions in Python. Now a function is basically just a collection of code, which performs a specific task. So I can take a bunch of lines of code that are basically doing one thing, I can put them inside of a function. And then when I wanted to do that task or do that one thing that the function was doing, I can just call the function. And so functions really help you to organize your code a lot better, they allow you to kind of break up your code into different, you know, little chunks that are doing different things. And they're really just awesome. So functions are like a very core concept when we're talking about programming in Python. So I'm going to show you guys how to create an awesome function today. Let's say for the purposes of this tutorial, we want to create a function that says hi to the user. So the one task that our function performs is basically just saying hi to whoever is writing the program. So over here, if I want to write a function, the first thing I have to use is a keyword in Python, it's called death so D E F. And basically when Python sees this keyword, it's going to say, Okay, this person wants to use a function. So after we type out death, we need to give this function a name. So just like when we are creating variables, we give them descriptive names, we also want to do the same thing with functions. So if I'm creating a function, I can just give it a specific name, which basically says like what it's doing. So we're going to create a function that says hi, so I'm just going to call this function. Say hi, just like that. And once we type out the name of the function. And so also I could type out say hi with no underscore or I could type out say hi with an underscore, both are considered like good practices in Python. A lot of times, if you just have a simple like two word function like this, you don't need to put an underscore but we could put an underscore there. If we wanted after we type out the name of the function, I'm just going to type an open and close parentheses. And then I'm going to type a colon. And basically what this is doing is it's saying to Python like, All right, all the code that comes after this line is going to be a new. Change the row and that won't start till either. And basically in this row, started to say we're typing out the line as the standard form, and then we choose to make sure that's the thing that we're searching for right. So now I wonder where the And that's kind of like one of the rules in Python is like the code that goes inside of this function needs to be indented. So if I was to write some code, like out here, this is no longer going to be considered inside the function. So you can see, as I type out code, and obviously this isn't real code, but as I type text over here, that's indented, this little like marker over here is basically saying like, Oh yeah, that's inside the function. But then when I write code over here, that is like not at the same indentation level as this stuff, it's no longer considering it inside the function. So that's just a little thing any code inside this function needs to be indented. Alright, so our function is just going to say hi to the user. So I'm just going to have it print out some text, it's going to say hello, user. So this is a very simple function. Obviously, we just have one line of code. And inside of a function, you could have, you know, as many lines of code as you want. But for our purposes, we only need one line in order to perform our function. So now all we have to do is call this function. So if I want to execute the code inside of this function, I have to do something called calling it. So if I was to just run my program as it is right now, I'm just going to run it. You'll see that nothing happens over here. Even though this function is printing out Hello user, when I run the program, it's not doing it. And that's because the code inside of a function isn't going to get executed by default. The code inside of a function is only going to get executed when we specify that we want to execute it. And in order to do that, we're going to have to do something called calling the function. So in order to call the function, you basically just type out the function's name and those open and close parentheses. So I'm just going to type out say hi, and open and close parentheses. And now when we when we run this program again, you'll see that it prints out Hello user. So we're executing the code inside of the function. And I want to show you guys just one more thing here, just talking to you guys about how these functions actually work. So up here, I'm going to print top, and then down here, I'm going to print bottom. So I want to show you guys the flow of these functions inside the program. So when I run this program, you'll see we print out top Hello user, and then bottom. So essentially, what's happening is when Python goes through and executes this program, it goes over here to this first line, it says, Okay, we want to print out the word top, and then it goes down here and it says, Okay, we want to execute the say hi function. So Python actually jumps up, and it goes over to this say hi function, and it's going to execute all of the code inside of this function. So it's going to go through execute all this code. And then once it's done executing all the code in the function, it's going to jump back down here, and it's going to move on to the next line, which is bottom. So that's kind of like the flow of functions. Again, with functions, generally, when we're naming these functions, you want them to be named in all lowercase. And usually when we're naming stuff in Python, if there's two or more words, we're going to use an underspace or an underscore in between them. So I could write this out as say underscore hi. But in a lot of situations, though, if I have a function like this, where the name is really short, I might just be easier to leave it without an underscore. But why don't we just put an underscore in there just to be super Python official. Alright, so now we can actually make these functions a little bit more powerful. And what we can do is we can give them information. So a lot of times when we write a function, we're going to want to have additional information that gets passed in. And these are called parameters. So a parameter is a piece of information that we give to the function. So over here, I can actually specify that this function needs to receive some parameters. So I can basically say like, Hey, if you're going to call this function, you need to give us some information, you need to give us some parameters. And all I have to do to do that is just type out the name of the parameter that I want to receive. So why don't we allow the code calling this function to tell it what name to say hi to up here, I can just say name. And basically what this means is it means whenever I call this say hi function, we have to give it a name. So down here, if I was to call this, I have to include a name in here. So I can say like, Mike, and what we can do now is we can actually access this parameter or this variable inside of our function. So I could come over here and instead of saying Hello user, I could say Hello name. And basically what this is going to do is it's just going to say Hello to whatever name got passed in here. So I'm actually going to copy this and we will do this twice. So I'll say Hello, Mike, Hello, Steve. And now when I run this program, you'll see that instead of just saying Hello user, it's saying Hello to whichever name I passed into the function. So that's why this can be really useful, right, we can give the function information. And depending on the information we give it, it'll perform its task a little bit differently. I could also include more than one parameter. So you can I mean, technically, you could have like as many parameters as you want. So I can put another one in here, we'd say age. And now I'm going to have to pass in an age along with these. So I'm just going to pass in age and pass in an age for down here. And I'm just going to pass in strings. So we can say Hello name. You are age. So I'm passing in two pieces of information. And now when we run this program, it's going to call the function. And it's going to use both of those pieces of information. So I'll say Hello, Mike, you are 35 Hello, Steve, you are 70. So essentially, we're writing out this one line of code, which just prints out like Hello to someone. And we're allowing this function to receive two parameters. So the name and the age, and depending on the name and the age, the function's going to print out Hello a little bit differently. And that's kind of the beauty of using functions. So you could pass anything you want into a function. So for example, I could pass in a integer instead of a string for the age. So like I could pass in the number, the only difference is over here, we're going to have to convert this into a string. But it's going to work just the same. So you could pass in strings, numbers, Booleans arrays, you can really pass any type of data into a function, and it's going to work. So you can see here, we get the same result. So that's the basics of functions. And as you go through with Python, you're going to be using functions more and more. And generally, it's a good idea to break your code up into different functions. So whenever you have like a grouping of code, that's designed to perform a specific task, that's usually a good candidate to be put inside of a function. Hey, thanks for watching. If you enjoyed the video, please leave a like and subscribe to Jaff Academy to be the first to know when we release new content. Also, we're always looking to improve. So if you have any constructive criticism or questions or anything, leave a comment below. Finally, if you're enjoying Jaff Academy and you want to help us grow, head over to draftacademy.com forward slash contribute and invest in our future.